.TH rft-train 1 "September 2008" "" "RFT"
.SH NAME
rft-train \- training program of the RFTagger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rft-train
.I corpus
.I wordclass-automaton
.I parfile
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rft-train
is used to train the tagger on a manually annotated training
corpus. It requires the training corpus and a wordclass automaton. The
wordclass automaton is used to assign classes to unknown words. The
POS guesser for unknown words deals with each class separately. The
parameter are stored in binary format in
.I parfile.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-l f
Additional lexicon entries are supplied in file f.
.TP
.B \-o f
The possible POS tags of unknown words are restricted to those listed in file f.
.TP
.B \-c n
The n preceding tags are used as context (default 2).
.TP
.B \-p v
The information gain pruning threshold is set to v (default 6).
.TP
.B \-s v
The smoothing weight for transition probs is set to v (default 1).
.TP
.B \-ls v
The smoothing weight for lexical probs is set to v (default 1).
.TP
.B \-g v
The information gain threshold for suffix tree pruning is set to v (default 1).
.TP
.B \-lt v
The pruning threshold for guesser tags is set to a probability of v (default 0.001).
.TP
.B \-q
The quiet mode is turned on.
.TP
.B \-v
The verbose mode is turned on.
.TP
.B \-vv
An even more verbose mode is turned on.
.TP
.B \-h
Information about program usage is printed.
.SH "FILE FORMATS"
The
.I corpus
file contains the manually annotated training corpus and has two
columns which are separated by a tab character. The words/tokens of
the training corpus are found in the first column and the respective POS tags in the second column. Each sentence is followed by an empty line. 
.PP
Example:
.PP
Texaner N.Reg.Nom.Sg.Masc
.br
gibt    VFIN.Full.3.Sg.Pres.Ind
.br
nur     ADV
.br
vage    ADJA.Pos.Acc.Sg.Fem
.br
Auskunft        N.Reg.Acc.Sg.Fem
.br
 ...
.PP
The optional lexicon file supplied with option 
.I -l
has three columns which are separated by tab characters. The first
column contains the wordform, the second column a (possible) POS tag
for this word and the third columns contains the lemma (base form) of
the word. Words with more than one possible POS tag require several
entries in the lexicon. The lemma information is currently not used by
the tagger.
.PP
Example:
.PP
a.      APPR    a.
.br
ab      APPR    ab
.br
ab      PART.Verb       ab
.br
abarbeiten      VFIN.Full.1.Pl.Pres.Ind abarbeiten
.br
 ...
.PP
The file with the open class POS tags supplied with option
.I -o
contains the list of possible POS tags of unknown words (usually noun,
adjective, adverb, and verb POS tags) separated by whitespace.
.PP
Example:
.PP
ADJA.Comp.Acc.Pl.Fem
.br
ADJA.Comp.Acc.Pl.Masc
.br
ADJA.Comp.Acc.Pl.Neut
.br
ADJA.Comp.Acc.Sg.Fem
.br
 ...
.PP
The
.I wordclass-automaton
file has three columns which are separated by tab characters. Each
line either contains information about a state transition or about a
final state. State transitions entries consist of a state number
(column 1), a single character (column 2), and a target character
(column 3). Final state entries consists of a state number (column 1),
the string "wordclass" (column 2), and the number of the word
class. States are numbered starting at 0. Word classes are numbered
starting at 1. Word class 0 is the default word class which is
assigned to all words which are not recognized by the automaton.
.PP
Example:
.PP
 ...
.br
5       8       3
.br
5       9       3
.br
1       wordclass       2
.br
3       wordclass       1
.br
4       wordclass       3
.PP
.RE
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.B rft-train
returns 0 unless some error occurs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rft-annotate rft-print
.SH AUTHOR
Helmut Schmid,
Institute for Computational Linguistics,
University of Stuttgart,
Email: schmid@ims.uni-stuttgart.de,
All Rights Reserved
